[MUSIC]
The first thing you need to think about
when creating a dashboard is your
audience.
What are their expectations?
What is important to them?
Before beginning with any dashboard, we
need to understand our core requirements.
The key message here is to determine
the most important question or
questions that the dashboard
should answer, as well as,
any corresponding key
performance indicator or KPI's.
Remember, that all of this needs to
be approached from the viewpoint
of the audience.
Next, we need to determine whether
the data is readily available, and
if it is, how to gather it.
Finally, we need to construct a key
message that shows our understanding of
the audience needs as well as their
technical background and knowledge.
For example, a dashboard for a product
manager will likely have a different focus
than a dashboard for a CEO.
The audience is going to dictate the type
of dashboard that needs to be created.
Once you understand your audience, you
can move on to selecting the dashboard.
There are three primary
types of dashboards.
Executive, analytical, and operational.
Executive dashboards contain high
level information in summary form and
usually cover a long time horizon in order
to communicate key organizational trends.
We frequently see these in
general managers, CEOs,
and other core executive offices.
This type of dashboard can help provide
live insights into the business.
And help them identify how and
where to focus their time.
It can also be used to communicate
corporate performance.
Analytical dashboards
are typically more detailed, and
used to facilitate
further ad hoc analysis.
Teams use these frequently
to explore the datasets
that may be too complicated to review
at the detailed line item level.
Operational dashboards usually
cover shorter timeframes
in order to focus on
specific operating goals.
We see these frequently in operations
where they're used to measure output and
other key operational KPI's.
Once you have selected the type
of dashboard that you need,
it's important to use
the principles of design.
There are five principles that
are intrinsically linked together.
The first design principle is balance and
proportions.
This refers to the distribution of
the visual weight of the object's color,
texture, and space.
Essentially, how are we
utilizing both the working and
the open space for
each dashboarding component.
The second design principle is emphasis.
Which is pretty much the opposite
of balance and proportions.
This refers to how we bring attention
to what is most important or
what should be read first by the audience.
The next design principle is
repetition and consistency.
This refers to how we can use
similar elements to elicit unity and
consistency across the dashboard.
This makes each component feel connected,
and ensures that the reader remains
focused on the overall message instead of
getting lost in the individual elements.
The next design principle is hierarchy.
This refers to how the design
of the dashboard can
help the reader understand the hierarchy
of the different objects, which in turn,
helps enforce the message
of the dashboard.
As mentioned in the previous courses,
data should always be used
to deliver a message.
And the correct hierarchical design
can help structure the message
more effectively.
The fifth and
final design principle is functionality.
This refers to the functional requirements
that need to be met by the dashboard.
These requirements are typically based
on the audience and include things like
having drill down capabilities to enable
the user to further explore the data.
It's essential to make sure the dashboard
is functional, that there are no software
incompatibilities with the end user and
that the navigation is intuitive.
These five design principles should
always be considered together and
we want to make sure that we integrate and
respect each of them as much as possible,
but without sacrificing the other four.
For example, we wouldn't want to build
a dashboard that is 100% balanced.
Since this will likely ignore
the principle of emphasis,
taking away from the overall
message of the dashboard.
We'll get a better feel for
these design principles, and
how they are linked together,
as we look at examples of dashboards,
and then start to practice
building them within Excel.
To help showcase what not to
do when creating a dashboard,
here we have a bad example.
As you can see,
it's difficult to determine which
controls refer to which graph.
The color scheme crowds the dashboard and
the chart proportions imply that revenue
by category is the most important element
of the business,
which isn't necessarily the case.
For example,
we might be equally interested in
seeing the revenue by category and
the revenue by sales channel, so that we
can see the correlation between the two.
In addition, the chart on
the right contains a trend line
that doesn't seem to be
adding much information.
To summarize, we risk confusing the end
user with this kind of dashboard
because we have not guided them
through the components by using
design principles like hierarchy and
repetition.
This example shows a different way of
displaying the same data as before.
This time,
the principles of design were kept in
mind while designing the dashboard.
Hence, the components are balanced,
logically grouped, and
the charts contain relevant information
without extraneous gridlines and borders.
With this view, the most prominent feature
of the dashboard are the charts, and
they are clear and concise.
This version of the dashboard tells
the story behind the data efficiently and
concisely.
Notice, that we have two primary
components to the dashboard, one dedicated
to the sales channel revenue and the other
to the revenue by product category.
Within each component,
we have the same design,
creating a sense of unity and balance.
The buttons at the top allow the user
to interact with the graph and
display the underlying data in
a variety of different ways.
If we think back to the bad
example we just looked at,
this dashboard clearly contains a lot
less guesswork for the end user.
Additionally, the story reads
clearly from top to bottom and
the components are easy to navigate.
When building dashboards,
it is important to think about
each of the individual components.
When deciding on these components, we need
to ensure the key message of the dashboard
is prominently displayed by putting
it in the highest priority position.
As you move through
the dashboarding process,
ask yourself, whether each component
serves a specific purpose and
answers the key question you found
during the requirements gathering phase.
Present metrics and measure that can
influence management decisions and
policies.
Unactionable information
should only be used sparingly.
When you are designing and
developing a dashboard,
it's essential to consider how it
can be maintained and updated.
It's worth it to spend time upfront to
build enough flexibility in the dashboard,
so that it can be updated with
new data using minimal effort.
During the requirements gathering phase,
it's important to understand how
often the dashboard will need to be
updated and how it will be updated.
For example, if the data requires
frequent updates to remain relevant,
it might make more sense to consider
building in a direct data feed that allows
the users to update
the dashboard regularly.
If, on the other hand, the data is pretty
static and will require minimal updating,
it might make more sense to rely
on a manual update process.
Remember to always include a timestamp
on a dashboard that is not updated
dynamically, so that the audience is aware
of when the data was last refreshed.
We also want to make sure we consider
how often our requirements might change
going forward.
If we expect that the requirements
could fluctuate in the future,
we may want to leave
some functionality out,
if we think that it could impede
our ability to make future changes.
When you're done building your dashboard,
and
start to think about delivering it to the
end user, always make sure to take some
time to confirm the dashboard
addresses all the questions and
requirements that were collected during
the requirements gathering phase.
Review each component of the dashboard
with the key message in mind.
This will help evaluate the dashboard
components for effectiveness and purpose.
If the component does not serve
the high-level message, consider removing
the component or refocusing it to
address the high-level message.
Finally, consider how the tool
will be delivered to the end-user.
Make sure that you hide everything
the user does not need to see.
Lock anything that should not be changed,
and consider how and
where the tool will be accessed.
Now that we've covered
the basics of dashboarding,
the next videos will move to
practical portions of dashboarding.
How do you actually create a dashboard?
As we navigate through
the practical portions,
do not lose sight of the design
principles that we just discussed.
Namely, how to implement the principles
in order to maintain a clear and
concise message, and
deliver an effective dashboard.
[MUSIC]